Master’s Programme in Data Analytics and Business Economics

Title: Estimating the Impact of Website Changes on Conversion Rates
A Double Machine Learning Approach

by
Jan Jakub Jarco, ja1710ja-s@lu.se

Abstract This study sought to evaluate the historical impact of changes to an ordering page of an online travel agency on its conversion rates. Data gathered from the website over a year, detailing aspects such as travel dates, prices, itineraries, number of passengers, travel time, and carriers, was analyzed. External data sources were also included, with the dataset covering 12 changes to the website’s layout and payment process. The changes’ effectiveness was assessed using three methods: comparing conversion rates before and after the changes, a modified linear regression model, and the Double Machine Learning (DML) method with Random Forests as the base learners. The analysis revealed that the only modification with a statistically significant positive impact on conversion rates was related bug fixing. Most changes did not significantly affect conversion rates, and some even demonstrated a non-significant negative impact. The DML method proved a useful tool in this context, outperforming simpler comparison methods with better control for confounding variables and reducing potential bias in Average Treatment Effect (ATE) estimation. However, estimates from the DML model were sensitive to the analysis time window. This study suggests future website design should focus on user-friendly and intuitive design, clear and detailed information provision, and careful evaluation of changes’ potential impact on user experience. 
Keywords: website design, causal inference, observational study, average treatment effects, double machine learning 

Introduction 
The travel industry has seen significant growth in recent years, with online travel agencies (OTAs) playing a crucial role in facilitating travel bookings for consumers. One such OTA, AOB Travel, is a Swedish agency operating in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, the Netherlands, and Germany. As a meta-search engine, AOB Travel aggregates and displays results from various flight search engines on their own servers and presents these results to travel search engines such as Momondo, Skyscanner, Flygresor, and Travelmarket. Customers seeking travel options can compare prices from multiple travel agencies through the travel search engine and select from which OTA they will order flight tickets. They are then redirected from these travel search engines to the ordering website maintained by AOB Travel, where they can finalize an order for flight tickets. 
A well-designed website is the key to achieving high returns in e-commerce. Particularly, within the online travel agency sector, the effectiveness of the website is more important than anything else due to its direct impact on customer behavior and conversion rates. About 80% of consumers looking for flight tickets visit more than one provider before ordering a ticket, suggesting a user- friendly website design alongside an attractive price is crucial for the effectiveness of online travel agencies (Statista 2017). Within the tourism industry, the website serves not only as a platform for business transactions but also as an essential part of the marketing strategy (Chan et al. 2021). This is the reason why web developers need to constantly make changes to the front end and back end of the website to maintain high performance. 
Role of AOB Travel in the study As an online travel agency, AOB Travel offers a broad range of travel options from various providers, making it a suitable candidate for examining the effects of changes to the website on a diverse set of customers. Particularly, this study focuses on the Danish market where the flysmarter.dk webpage is available to customers. This AOB Travel’s website is the one with the most significant number of changes, providing valuable insights into the impact of changes in the layout and payment process on the conversion rate (AOB Travel 2023). 
Aim of the study This research paper aims to estimate the average treatment effects of changes in the ordering page and how they contribute to the ratio of orders and visits on their website from travel search engines to provide actionable insights for future website optimization processes. 
Usually, web developers would use A/B testing for the evaluation of changes to the website. This method has been the gold standard for evaluation in online controlled experiments (Kohavi, Deng, et al. 2012; Siroker and Koomen 2013; Luca and Bazerman 2021). This method allows for assessing the causal impact of the proposed changes in controlled randomized experiments, offering robust insights for decision-making. 
However, there are circumstances where web developers seek to provide insights on historical changes where online controlled experiments were not conducted. Also, conducting A/B tests may be unfeasible due to a lack of control over the causal action, high opportunity costs, expensive implementation, impracticality of proper randomization, or ethical and legal limitations (Kohavi, Tang, and Y. Xu 2020). In such scenarios, methods that leverage machine learning algorithms offer alternative ways of identifying Average Treatment Effects (ATEs) in the presence of confounding factors and have gained increased attention due to their capabilities to capture complex relations between variables (Athey and Wager 2019; Karmakar, Majumder, and Gangaraju 2023). In par- ticular, this thesis will focus on Double Machine Learning (DML), an approach that has shown promising results for bias reduction in observational studies when compared to standard methods (Chernozhukov et al. 2018). 
Data about website visits and resulting orders were gathered to evaluate the impact of changes and provide insights for future website design. This data, including details about travel dates, prices, itineraries, number of passengers, travel time, and carriers, helped identify potential con- founding variables. Data from external sources was incorporated to expand the dataset. Over the past year, a total of 12 changes were made to the website’s layout and payment process. 
To test each change, the data was divided into two sub-groups - the period before the change (the control group) and the period after the change (the treatment group). For each treatment, the set of confounding variables and an output variable were evaluated, with the output variable indicating whether the visit resulted in order or not. 
The effectiveness of the changes was assessed using three different methods: 
	1.	The conversion rates before and after the changes were compared  
	2.	A modified linear regression model was used, which included the ordinary treatment variable along with the set of confounders  
	3.	The Double Machine Learning method was employed, utilizing Partially Linear Regression with Random Forests as the base learners  
In the context of evaluating the impact of changes on the conversion rate of an ordering website, the Double Machine Learning (DML) framework appears to be a suitable choice, as will be further discussed in the following sections. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: The literature review in Section 2 provides an overview of causal inference in website performance, with an exploration of Randomized Control Trials (RCTs), A/B testing as an analogue of RCTs, its limitations, scenarios restricting the feasibility of randomized controlled experiments, and implications for the study. Also covered is the estimation of Average Treatment Effects (ATE), various models for ATE estimation and ensemble methods used as base learners. 


